todo!() Boldface, underlined, etc standards are not delineated. See Table 82.1A

California Department of Transportation
Highway Design Manual
U.S. Customary Units

# FOREWORD
### Purpose
This manual was prepared for the California Department of Transportation (Department) by the Division of Design for use on the California State highway system. This manual establishes uniform policies and procedures to carry out the State highway design functions of the Department. It is neither intended as, nor does it establish, a legal standard for these functions. The standards, procedures, and requirements established and discussed herein are for the information and guidance of the officers and employees of the Department. Many of the instructions given herein are subject to amendment as conditions and experience warrant. Special situations may call for deviation from policies and procedures, subject to Division of Design approval, or such other approval as may be specifically provided for in the text of this manual. It is not intended that any standard of conduct or duty toward the public shall be created or imposed by the publication of this manual. Statements as to the duties and responsibilities of any given classification of officers or employees mentioned herein refer solely to duties or responsibilities owed by these in such classification to their superiors. However, in their official contacts, each employee should recognize the necessity for good relations with the public.
### Scope
This manual is not a textbook or a substitute for engineering knowledge, experience, or judgment. It includes techniques as well as graphs and tables not ordinarily found in textbooks. These are intended as aids in the quick solutions of field and office problems. Except for new developments, no attempt is made to detail basic engineering techniques; for these, standard textbooks should be used.
### Form
The loose-leaf form was chosen because it facilitates change and expansion. New instructions or updates will be issued as sheets in the format of this manual and made available on-line on the Department Design website: https://dot.ca.gov/programs/design/manual-highway-design- manual-hdm. The new instructions or updates may consist of additional sheets or new sheets to be substituted for those superseded. Users of this manual are encouraged to utilize the most recent version available on-line on the Department Design website.
### Organization of the Manual
A decimal numbering system is used which permits identification by chapter, topic, and index, each of which is a subdivision of the preceding classification. For example:
	Chapter 40 Federal-Aid
	Topic 42 Federal-Aid System
	Index 42.2 Interstate
The upper corner of each page shows the page number and the date of issue.
### Use the Table of Contents
The Table of Contents gives the index number and page number for each topical paragraph together with corresponding dates of issue. If the holder of the manual chooses to maintain a paper copy, the holder is responsible for keeping the paper copy up to date and current. Revised Table of Contents will be issued on the Department Design website as the need arises.
### Use of the Highway Design Manual in U.S. Customary (English) Units
This Seventh Edition of the Highway Design Manual is in U.S. Customary (English) units. Departmental policy established by Director’s Policy 15-R1 and Deputy Directive Number 12- R1, both effective October 2006, state that the Department has adopted the use of the U.S. Customary (English) units as its preferred system of units and measures. All projects designed and constructed in English units shall follow the standards in this manual.
### Use of the HDM as a Reference in Other Media
No warranty is made regarding the results of use of this Caltrans Highway Design Manual (HDM) or that the HDM will accurately and reliably test construction designs for compliance with any Federal, State or industry standards, or that the HDM will predict or test the safety or other feature or a structure. Engineering judgment must be used to apply the HDM to designs and to adjust designs to fit individual site conditions. The HDM is not intended to be a substitute for engineering knowledge, experience or judgment. In no event shall the Department be liable for costs of procurement of substitute goods, loss of profits, or for any indirect, special, consequential or incidental damages, however caused, by use of the HDM. The Department shall not be liable for any claims in connection with the use of the HDM, including without limitation, liability arising from third-party claims, liability related to the quality of calculations or the safety or quality or structures, liability for scheduling delays or re-design, retrofit or re-work of structures, or other similar liability.

┌───────────────────────┐  
│Chapters 10-40 Skipped.│  
└───────────────────────┘  

# CHAPTER 60 - NOMENCLATURE
Unless indicated otherwise in this manual, wherever the following abbreviations, terms, or phrases are used, their intent and meaning shall be as identified in this Chapter.
## Topic 61 — Abbreviations
#### Index 61.1 — Official Names
Amer. Asso. of State Highway & Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
California Department of Transportation                 (Caltrans or Department)
Code ot Federal Regulations                             (CFR)
California Transportation Commission                    (CTC or Commission)
Division of Engineering Services                        (DES)
Department of Transportation Districts                  (District)
U.S. Department of Transportation                       (DOT)
Division of Design                                      (DOD)
Federal Aviation Administration                         (FAA)
Federal Highway Administration                          (FHWA)
Geotechnical Services                                   (GS)
Office of Materials Engineering and Testing Services    (METS)
Office of Asphalt Pavements                             (OAP)
Office of Concrete Pavements                            (OCP)
Pavement Program                                        (pp)
Plans, Specifications, and Estimate                     (PS&E)
Public Utilities Commission                             (PUC)
Structure Design                                        (SD)
State Highway Operation and Protection Plan             (SHOPP)
State Transportation Improvement Program                (STIP)

## Topic 62 — Definitions
### 62.1 Geometric Cross Section
(1) Lane. 
	a) Auxiliary Lane--The portion of the roadway for weaving, truck climbing, speed change, or for other purposes supplementary to through movement. 
	b) Lane Numbering--On a multilane roadway, the lanes available for through travel in the same direction are numbered from left to right when facing in the direction of travel. 
	c) Multiple Lanes--Freeways and conventional highways are sometimes defined by the number of through lanes in both directions. Thus an 8-lane freeway has 4 through lanes in each direction. Likewise, a 4-lane conventional highway has 2 through lanes in each direction. Lanes that are not equally distributed to each direction would otherwise be described as appropriate. 
	d) Median Lane--A speed change lane within the median to accommodate left turning vehicles. 
	e) Speed Change Lane--An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles when entering or leaving the through lanes. 
	f) Traffic Lane/Vehicle Lane--The portion of the traveled way for the movement of a single line of vehicles, both motor vehicle and bicycle. 
(2) Bikeways. 
	a) Class I Bikeway  (Bike Pat h). Provides a completely separated facility for the exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians with crossflow by vehicles minimized. 
	b) Class II Bikeway  (Bike Lan e). Provides a striped lane for one-way bike travel on a street or highway. 
	c) Class III Bikeway  (Bike Rout e). Provides for shared use with pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic. 
	d) Class IV Bikeway  (Separated Bikewa y). Provides for the exclusive use of bicycles and includes a separation  (e.g., grade separation, flexible posts, inflexible physical barrier, or on-street parkin g) required between the separated bikeway and the through vehicular traffic. 
(3) Maintenance Vehicle Pullout  (MVP). Paved areas, or appropriate all weather surfaces, adjacent to the shoulder for field personnel to park off the traveled way and access the work site. 
(4) Median. The portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways in opposite directions. 
(5) Outer Separation. The portion of an arterial highway between the traveled ways of a roadway and a frontage street or road. 
(6) Roadbed. That portion of the roadway extending from curb line to curb line or shoulder line to shoulder line. Divided highways are considered to have two roadbeds. 
(7) Roadside. A general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadbed to the right of way line. Extensive areas between the roadbeds of a divided highway may also be considered roadside. 
(8) Roadway. That portion of the highway included between the outside lines of the sidewalks, or curbs and gutters, or side ditches including also the appertaining structures, and all slopes, ditches, channels, waterways, and other features necessary for proper drainage and protection. 
(9) Shoulder. The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for the accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, for errant vehicle recovery, and for lateral support of base and surface courses. The shoulder may accommodate on- street parking as well as bicyclists and pedestrians, see the guidance in this manual as well as DIB 82. 
(10) Sidewalk. A surfaced pedestrian way contiguous to a roadbed used by the public where the need for which is created primarily by the local land use. See DIB 82 for further guidance. 
(11) Traveled Way. The portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles and bicycles, exclusive of shoulders.

### 62.2 Highway Structures
(1) Illustration of Types of Structures. Figure 62.2 illustrates the names given to common types of structures used in highway construction. This nomenclature must be used in all phases of planning. 
(2) Bridges. A structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction, such as water, highway, or railway, and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads; and having an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than 20 feet between undercopings of abutments or spring lines of  (buried) arches, or extreme ends of openings for  (buried) multiple boxes. It may also include  (buried) multiple pipes, where the clear distance between openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening. 
(3) Culverts. A type of buried structure without a bridge number, see Index 806.2. Any structure that fits the definition of a bridge shall be assigned a bridge number by Structure Maintenance and Investigation. Buried structures that meet the definition of a bridge but are made of a collection of culverts will only be considered as bridges for the purposes of design and structural maintenance record, not for definitions in specifications. Buried structures, with or without bridge numbers, covered by Caltrans Standard Plans can be designed by the District. Culvert modifications to Standard Plans can be designed by the District and shall be reviewed by the Division of Engineering Services. Buried structure with a bridge number but not covered by Standard Plans shall be designed by the Division of Engineering Services.

Figure 62.2 Types of Structures
   UNDERPASS       OVERHEAD      BRIDGE&OVER.       VIADUCT
┌─────────────┐ ┌─────────────┐ ┌─────────────┐ ┌─────────────┐
│Railroad     │ │State Highway│ │State Highway│ │State Highway│
│^            │ │^            │ │^            │ │^            │
│State Highway│ │Railroad     │ │Railroad     │ │Local Street │
└─────────────┘ │Local Street │ │Stream       │ └─────────────┘
                └─────────────┘ └─────────────┘
    BRIDGE       OVERCROSSING    UNDERCROSSING    SEPARATION
┌─────────────┐ ┌─────────────┐ ┌─────────────┐ ┌─────────────┐
│State Highway│ │Local Street │ │State Highway│ │State Highway│
│^            │ │^            │ │^            │ │^            │
│Stream       │ │State Highway│ │Local Road   │ │State Highway│
└─────────────┘ └─────────────┘ └─────────────┘ └─────────────┘
(Note: ^ means underneath.)

### 62.3 Highway Types
(1) Freeway. A freeway, as defined by statute, is a highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands or in respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access. This statutory definition also includes expressways.
(2) The engineering definitions for use in this manual are: a) Freeway--A divided arterial highway with full control of access and with grade sepa- rations at intersections. b) Expressway--An arterial highway with at least partial control of access, which may or may not be divided or have grade separations at intersections.
(3) Controlled Access Highway. In situations where it has been determined advisable by the Director or the CTC, a facility may be designated a "controlled access highway" in lieu of the designation "freeway". All statutory provisions pertaining to freeways and expressways apply to controlled access highways.
(4) Conventional Highway. A highway without control of access which may or may not be divided. Grade separations at intersections or access control may be used when justified at spot locations.
(5) Highway. In general a public right of way for the purpose of travel or transportation.
	(a) Alley--A road passing through a continuous row of houses, buildings, etc. that permits access from the local street network to backyards, garages, etc.
	(b) Arterial Highway--A general term denoting a highway primarily for through travel usually on a continuous route.
	(c) Bypass--An arterial highway that permits users to avoid part or all of a city or town center, a suburban area, or an urban area.
	(d) Collector-Distributor Road--A separated freeway system adjacent to a freeway, which connects two or more local road ramps or freeway connections to the freeway at a limited number of points.
	(e) Collector Road--A route that serves travel of primarily intracounty rather than statewide importance in rural areas or a route that serves both land access and traffic circulation within a residential neighborhood, as well as commercial and industrial areas in urban and suburban areas.
	(f) Divided Highway--A highway with separated roadbeds for traffic traveling in opposing directions.
	(g) Major Street or Major Highway--An arterial highway with intersections at grade and direct access to abutting property on which geometric design and traffic control measures are used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic.
	(h) Through Street or Through Highway--The highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is regulated by “STOP” signs or traffic control signals or is controlled when entering on a separate right-turn roadway by a “YIELD” sign.
(6) Parkway. An arterial highway for noncommercial vehicles, with full or partial control of access, which is typically located within a park or a ribbon of park-like development.
(7) Scenic Highway. A State or county highway, in total or in part, that is recognized for its scenic value, protected by a locally adopted corridor protection program, and has been officially designated by the Department. 
(8) Street or Road.
	a. Cul-de-Sac Street--A local street open at one end only, with special provisions for turning around.
	b. Dead End Street/No Outlet--A local street open at one end only, without special provisions for turning around.
	c. Frontage Street or Road--A local street or road auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial highway for service to abutting property and adjacent areas and for control of access.
	d. Local Street or Local Road--A street or road primarily for access to residence, business or other abutting property.
	e. Private Road or Private Driveway--A way or place in private ownership and used for travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other members of the public.
	f. Street--A way or place that is publicly maintained and open for the use of the public to travel. Street includes highway.
	g. Toll Road, Bridge or Tunnel--A highway, bridge, or tunnel open to traffic only upon payment of a toll or fee. 
(9) Throughway. A conventional highway or a suburban arterial in developed or developing areas, that is characterized by lower density  (not built out) land uses, adjacent undeveloped land or parkland, direct access to abutting property, at-grade intersections, and that may have shoulders with or without curb and gutter.

### 62.4 Interchanges and Intersections at Grade
(1) Central Island. The raised area in the center of a roundabout around which traffic circulates. The central island does not necessarily need to be circular in shape.
(2) Circulatory Roadway. The curved roadbed that users of a roundabout travel on in a counterclockwise direction around the central island.
(3) Channelization. The separation or regulation of conflicting movements into definite paths of travel by the use of pavement markings, raised islands, or other suitable means to facilitate the safe and orderly movement of vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians.
(4) Convergence Point. The point of convergence occurs where the right ETW of the entrance ramp is one lane width from the right ETW of the freeway.
(5) Crosswalk. Crosswalk is either:
	(a) That portion of a roadway included within the prolongation or connection of the boundary lines of sidewalks at intersections where the intersecting roadways meet at approximately right angles, except the prolongation of such lines from an alley across a street.
	(b) Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
(6) Geometric Design. The arrangement of the visible elements of a road, such as alignment, grades, sight distances, widths, slopes, and other similar elements.
(7) Gore. The area between a through roadway and an exit ramp. This term may also refer to the similar area between a through roadway and a converging entrance ramp.
(8) Grade Separation. A crossing of two highways, highway and local road, or a highway and a railroad at different levels.
(9) Inscribed Circle Diameter. The distance across the circle of a roundabout, inscribed by the outer curb (or edge) of the circulatory roadway. It is the sum of the central island diameter and twice the circulatory roadway width.
(10)Interchange. A system of interconnecting roadways in conjunction with one or more grade separations that provides for the movement of vehicles between two or more roadways on different levels.
(11)Interchange Elements.
	(a) Branch Connection--A multilane connection between two freeways.
	(b) Freeway-to-freeway Connection--A single or multilane connection between freeways or any two high speed facilities.
	(c) Ramp--A connecting roadway between a freeway or expressway and another highway, road, or roadside area.
(12)Intersection. The general area where two or more roadways join or cross, including the roadway and roadside facilities for movements in that area.
(13)Island. A defined area between roadway lanes for control of vehicle movements or for pedestrian refuge. Within an intersection a median or an outer separation is considered an island.
(14)Landscape Buffer/Strip. A planted section adjacent to the legs of a roundabout that separates users of the roadway from users of the shared use/Class I Bikeway and assists with guiding pedestrians to the designated crossing locations. Also known as “way finding.”
(15)Minimum Turning Radius. The radius of the path of the outer front wheel of a vehicle making its sharpest turn.
(16)Offset Left-Turn Lanes. Left-turn lanes are shifted as far to the left as practical rather than aligning the left-turn lane exactly parallel with and adjacent to the through lane.
(17)Offtracking. The difference between the paths of the front and rear wheels of a vehicle as it negotiates a turn.
(18)Pedestrian Refuge. A section of pavement or sidewalk, completely surrounded by asphalt or other road materials, where users can stop before completing the crossing of a road.
(19)Roundabout. A type of circular intersection with specific geometric and traffic control features that in combination lower speed operations and lower speed differentials among all users immediately prior to, through, and beyond the intersection. Vehicle speed is controlled by deflection in the path of travel, and the “yield upon entry” rule for traffic approaching the roundabout’s circulatory roadway. Curves and deflections are introduced that limit operating speeds.
(20)Splitter Island. A raised or painted traffic island that separates traffic in opposing directions of travel. They are typically used at roundabouts and on the minor road approaches to an intersection.
(21)Skew Angle. The complement of the acute angle between two centerlines which cross.
(22)Swept width. The total width needed by the vehicle body to traverse a curve. It is the distance measured along the curve radius from the outer front corner of the body to the inner rear corner of the body as the vehicle traverses around a curve. This width is used to determine lane width and clearance to objects, such as signs, poles, etc., as well as vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians.
(23)Tracking width. The total width needed by the tires to traverse a curve; it is the distance measured along the curve radius from the outer front tire track to the inner rear tire track as the vehicle traverses around a curve. This width is used to determine the minimum width required for the vehicle turning. Consideration for additional width may be needed for other vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians.
(24)Truck Apron. The traversable portion of the roundabout central island adjacent to the circulatory roadway that may be needed to accommodate the wheel tracking of large vehicles. A truck apron is sometimes provided on the outside of the circulatory roadway, but cannot encroach upon the pedestrian crossing.
(25)Weaving Section. A length of roadway, designed to accommodate two traffic streams merging and diverging within a short distance.
(26)Wheelbase. For single-unit vehicles, the distance from the first axle to the single rear axle or, in the case of a tandem or triple set of rear axles, to the center of the group of rear axles. See Topic 404

### 62.5 Landscape Architecture
(1) Classified Landscaped Freeway. A classified landscaped freeway is a planted section of freeway that meets the criteria established by the California Code of Regulations Outdoor Advertising Regulations, Title 4, Division 6. This designation is used in the control and regulation of outdoor advertising displays.
(2) Park and Ride. A paved area for parking which provides a connection point for public access to a variety of modal options. See Topic 915.
(3) Safety Roadside Rest Area System. The safety roadside rest area system is a component of the highway system providing roadside areas where travelers can stop, rest and manage their travel needs. Planned with consideration of alternative stopping opportunities such as truck stops, commercial services, and vista points, the rest area system provides public stopping opportunities where they are most needed, usually between large towns and at entrances to major metropolitan areas. See Topic 913.
(4) Site Furnishings. Features such as newspaper boxes, bicycle racks, bus shelters, benches, trash receptacles, interpretive panels, art or drinking fountains that occupy space on or alongside pedestrian sidewalks.
(5) Vista Point. Typically a paved dedicated area beyond the shoulder that permits travelers to stop and view a scenic area. See Topic 914.

### 62.6 Right of Way
(1) Acquisition. The process of obtaining rights of way.
(2) Air Rights. The property rights for the control or specific use of a designated airspace involving a highway.
(3) Appraisal. An expert opinion of the market value of property including damages and special benefits, if any, as of a specified date, resulting from an analysis of facts.
(4) Business District (or Central Business District). The commercial and often the geographic heart of a city, which may be referred to as “downtown.” Usually contains retail stores, theatres, entertainment and convention venues, government buildings, and little or no industry because of the high value of land. Historic sections may be referred to as “old town.”
(5) Condemnation. The process by which property is acquired for public purposes through legal proceedings under power of eminent domain.
(6) Control of Access. The condition where the right of owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons to access in connection with a highway is fully or partially controlled by public authority.
(7) Easement. A right to use or control the property of another for designated purposes.
(8) Eminent Domain. The power to take private property for public use without the owner's consent upon payment of just compensation.
(9) Encroachment. In terms of exceptions and permits, includes, but is not limited to, any structure, object, or activity of any kind or character which is within the State right of way, but it is not a part of the State facility or serving a transportation need.
(10)Inverse Condemnation. The legal process which may be initiated by a property owner to compel the payment of just compensation, where the property has been taken for or damaged by a public purpose.
(11)Negotiation. The process by which property is sought to be acquired for project purposes through mutual agreement upon the terms for transfer of such property.
(12)Partial Acquisition. The acquisition of a portion of a parcel of property.
(13)Relinquishment. A transfer of the State's right, title, and interest in and to a highway, or portion thereof, to a city or county.
(14)Right of Access. The right of an abutting land owner for entrance to or exit from a public road.
(15)Severance Damages. Loss in value of the remainder of a parcel which may result from a partial taking of real property and/or from the project.
(16)Vacation. The reversion of title to the owner of the underlying fee where an easement for highway purposes is no longer needed.

### 62.7 Pavement
The following list of definitions includes terminologies that are commonly used in California as well as selected terms from the "AASHTO Guide for the Design of Pavement Structures" which may be used by FHWA, local agencies, consultants, etc. in pavement engineering reports and research publications.
(1) Asphalt Concrete. See Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA).
(2) Asphalt Rubber. A blend of asphalt binder, reclaimed tire rubber, and certain additives in which the rubber component is at least 15 percent by weight of the total blend and has reacted in the hot asphalt binder sufficiently to cause swelling of the rubber particles.
(3) Asphalt Treated Permeable Base (ATPB). A highly permeable open-graded mixture of crushed coarse aggregate and asphalt binder placed as the base layer to assure adequate drainage of the structural section, as well as structural support.
(4) Base. A layer of selected, processed, and/or treated aggregate material that is placed immediately below the surface course. It provides additional load distribution and contributes to drainage and frost resistance.
(5) Basement Soil/Material. See Subgrade.
(6) Borrow. Natural soil obtained from sources outside the roadway prism to make up a deficiency in excavation quantities.
(7) California R-Value. A measure of resistance to deformation of the soils under saturated conditions and traffic loading as determined by the stabilometer test (CT301). The California R-value, also referred to as R-value, measures the supporting strength of the subgrade and subsequent layers used in the pavement structure. For additional information, see Topic 614.
(8) Capital Preventive Maintenance. Typically, Capital Preventive Maintenance (CAPM) consists of work performed to preserve the existing pavement structure utilizing strategies that preserve or extend pavement service life. The CAPM program is divided into pavement preservation and pavement rehabilitation. For further discussion see Topic 603.
(9) Cement Treated Permeable Base (CTPB). A highly permeable open-graded mixture of coarse aggregate, portland cement, and water placed as the base layer to provide adequate drainage of the structural section, as well as structural support.
(10)Composite Pavement. These are pavements comprised of both rigid and flexible layers. Currently, for purposes of the procedures in this manual, only flexible over rigid composite pavements are considered composite pavements.
(11)Crack. Separation of the pavement material due to thermal and moisture variations, consolidation, vehicular loading, or reflections from an underlying pavement joint or separation.
(12)Crack, Seat, and Overlay (CSO). A rehabilitation strategy for rigid pavements. CSO practice requires the contractor to crack and seat the rigid pavement slabs, and place a flexible overlay with a pavement reinforcing fabric (PRF) interlayer.
(13)Crumb Rubber Modifier (CRM). Scrap rubber produced from scrap tire rubber and other components, if required, and processed for use in wet or dry process modification of asphalt paving.
(14)Deflection. The downward vertical movement of a pavement surface due to the application of a load to the surface.
(15)Dense Graded Asphalt Concrete (DGAC). See Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA).
(16)Depression. Localized low areas of limited size that may or may not be accompanied by cracking.
(17)Dowel Bar. A load transfer device in a rigid slab usually consisting of a plain round steel bar.
(18)Edge Drain System. A drainage system, consisting of a slotted plastic collector pipe encapsulated in treated permeable material and a filter fabric barrier, with unslotted plastic pipe vents, outlets, and cleanouts, designed to drain both rigid and flexible pavement structures.
(19)Embankment. A prism of earth that is constructed from excavated or borrowed natural soil and/or rock, extending from original ground to the grading plane, and designed to provide a stable support for the pavement structure.
(20)Equivalent Single Axle Loads (ESAL's). The number of 18-kip standard single axle load repetitions that would have the same damage effect to the pavement as an axle of a specified magnitude and configuration. See Index 613.2 for additional information.
(21)Flexible Pavement. Pavements engineered to transmit and distribute vehicle loads to the underlying layers. The highest quality layer is the surface course (generally asphalt binder mixes) which may or may not incorporate underlying layers of base and subbase. These types of pavements are called "flexible" because the total pavement structure bends or flexes to accommodate deflection bending under vehicle loads. For further discussion, see Chapter 630.
(22)Grading Plane. The surface of the basement material upon which the lowest layer of subbase, base, pavement surfacing, or other specified layer, is placed.
(23)Gravel Factor (Gf ). Refers to the relative strength of a given material compared to a standard gravel subbase material. The cohesiometer values were used to establish the Gf currently used by Caltrans.
(24)Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA). Formerly known as asphalt concrete (AC), HMA is a graded asphalt concrete mixture (aggregate and asphalt binder) containing a small percentage of voids which is used primarily as a surface course to provide the structural strength needed to distribute loads to underlying layers of the pavement structure.
(25)Hot Recycled Asphalt (HRA). The use of reclaimed flexible pavement which is combined with virgin aggregates, asphalt, and sometimes rejuvenating agents at a central hot-mix plant and placed in the pavement structure in lieu of using all new materials.
(26)Joint Seals. Pourable, extrudable or premolded materials that are placed primarily in transverse and longitudinal joints in concrete pavement to deter the entry of water and incompressible materials (such as sand that is broadcast in freeze-thaw areas to improve skid resistance).
(27)Lean Concrete Base. Mixture of aggregate, portland cement, water, and optional admixtures, primarily used as a base for portland cement concrete pavement.
(28)Longitudinal Joint. A joint normally placed between roadway lanes in rigid pavements to control longitudinal cracking; and the joint between the traveled way and the shoulder.
(29)Maintenance. The preservation of the entire roadway, including pavement structure, shoulders, roadsides, structures, and such traffic control devices as are necessary for its safe and efficient utilization.
(30)Open Graded Asphalt Concrete (OGAC). See Open Graded Friction Course (OGFC).
(31)Open Graded Friction Course (OGFC). Formerly known as open graded asphalt concrete (OGAC), OGFC is a wearing course mix consisting of asphalt binder and aggregate with relatively uniform grading and little or no fine aggregate and mineral filler. OGFC is designed to have a large number of void spaces in the compacted mix as compared to hot mix asphalt. For further discussion, see Topic 631.
(32)Overlay. An overlay is a layer, usually hot mix asphalt, placed on existing flexible or rigid pavement to restore ride quality, to increase structural strength (load carrying capacity), and to extend the service life.
(33)Pavement. The planned, engineered system of layers of specified materials (typically consisting of surface course, base, and subbase) placed over the subgrade soil to support the cumulative vehicle loading anticipated during the design life of the pavement. The pavement is also referred to as the pavement structure and has been referred to as pavement structural section.
(34)Pavement Design Life. Also referred to as performance period, pavement design life is the period of time that a newly constructed or rehabilitated pavement is engineered to perform before reaching a condition that requires CAPM, (see Index 603.3). The selected pavement design life varies depending on the characteristics of the highway facility, the objective of the project, and projected vehicle volume and loading.
(35)Pavement Drainage System. A drainage system used for both asphalt and rigid pavements consisting of a treated permeable base layer and a collector system which includes a slotted plastic pipe encapsulated in treated permeable material and a filter fabric barrier with unslotted plastic pipe as vents, outlets and cleanouts to rapidly drain the pavement structure. For further discussion, see Chapter 650.
(36)Pavement Preservation. Work done, either by contract or by State forces to preserve the ride quality, safety characteristics, functional serviceability and structural integrity of roadway facilities on the State highway system. For further discussion, see Topic 603.
(37)Pavement Service Life. Is the actual period of time that a newly constructed or rehabilitated pavement structure performs satisfactorily before reaching its terminal serviceability or a condition that requires major rehabilitation or reconstruction. Because of the many independent variables involved, pavement service life may be considerably longer or shorter than the design life of the pavement. For further discussion, see Topic 612.
(38)Pavement Structure. See Pavement.
(39)Pumping. The ejection of base material, either wet or dry, through joints or cracks, or along edges of rigid slabs resulting from vertical movements of the slab under vehicular traffic loading. This phenomena is especially pronounced with saturated structural sections.
(40)Raveling. Progressive disintegration of the surface course on asphalt concrete pavement by the dislodgement of aggregate particles and binder.
(41)Rehabilitation. Work undertaken to extend the service life of an existing facility. This includes placement of additional surfacing and/or other work necessary to return an existing roadway, including shoulders, to a condition of structural or functional adequacy, for the specified service life. This might include the partial or complete removal and replacement of portions of the pavement structure (see Index 603.4).
(42)Resurfacing. A supplemental surface layer or replacement layer placed on an existing pavement to restore its riding qualities and/or to increase its structural (load carrying) strength.
(43)Rigid Pavement. Pavement engineered with a rigid surface course (typically Portland cement concrete or a variety of specialty cement mixes for rapid strength concretes) which may incorporate underlying layers of stabilized or unstabilized base or subbase materials. These types of pavements rely on the substantially higher stiffness of the rigid slab to distribute the vehicle loads over a relatively wide area of underlying layers and the subgrade. Some rigid slabs have reinforcing steel to help resist cracking due to temperature changes and repetitive loading.
(44)Roadbed. The roadbed is that area between the intersection of the upper surface of the roadway and the side slopes or curb lines. The roadbed rises in elevation as each increment or layer of subbase, base or surface course is placed. Where the medians are so wide as to include areas of undisturbed land, a divided highway is considered as including two separate roadbeds.
(45)Asphalt Rubber Binder. A blend of asphalt binder modified with crumb rubber modifier (CRM) that may include less than 15 percent CRM by mass.
(46)Rubberized Hot Mix Asphalt (RHMA). Formerly known as rubberized asphalt concrete (RAC). RHMA is a material produced for hot mix applications by mixing either asphalt rubber or asphalt rubber binder with graded aggregate. RHMA may be gap- (RHMA-G) or open- (RHMA-O) graded.
(47)R-value. See California R-Value.
(48)Serviceability. The ability at time of observation of a pavement to serve vehicular traffic (automobiles and trucks) which use the facility. The primary measure of serviceability is the Present Serviceability Index (PSI), which ranges from 0 (impossible road) to 5 (perfect road).
(49)Settlement. Localized vertical displacement of the pavement structure due to slippage or consolidation of the underlying foundation, often resulting in pavement deterioration, cracking and poor ride quality.
(50)Structural Section. See Pavement Structure.
(51)Structural Section Drainage System. See Pavement Drainage System.
(52)Subbase. Unbound aggregate or granular material that is placed on the subgrade as a foundation or working platform for the base. It functions primarily as structural support, but it can also minimize the intrusion of fines from the subgrade into the pavement structure, improve drainage, and minimize frost action damage.
(53)Subgrade. Also referred to as basement soil, it is the portion of the roadbed consisting of native or treated soil on which pavement surface course, base, subbase, or a layer of any other material is placed.
(54) Surface Course. One or more uppermost layers of the pavement structure engineered to carry and distribute vehicle loads. The surface course typically consists of a weather- resistant flexible or rigid layer, which provides characteristics such as friction, smoothness, resistance to vehicle loads, and drainage. In addition, the surface course minimizes infiltration of surface water into the underlying base, subbase and subgrade. A surface course may be composed of a single layer with one or multiple lifts, or multiple layers of differing materials.
(55) Tie Bars. Deformed reinforcing bars placed at intervals that hold rigid pavement slabs in adjoining lanes and exterior lane-to-shoulder joints together and prevent differential vertical and lateral movement.

### 62.8 Highway Operations
(1) Annual Average Daily Traffic. The average 24-hour volume, being the total number during a stated period divided by the number of days in that period. Unless otherwise stated, the period is a year. The term is commonly abbreviated as ADT or AADT.
(2) Delay. The time lost while road users are impeded by some element over which the user has no control.
(3) Density. The number of vehicles per mile on the traveled way at a given instant.
(4) Design Vehicles. See Topic 404.
(5) Design Volume. A volume determined for use in design, representing traffic expected to use the highway. Unless otherwise stated, it is an hourly volume.
(6) Diverging. The dividing of a single stream of traffic into separate streams.
(7) Headway. The time in seconds between consecutive vehicles moving past a point in a given lane, measured front to front.
(8) Level of Service. A rating using qualitative measures that characterize operational conditions within a traffic stream and their perception by users
(9) Managed Lanes. Lanes that are proactively managed in response to changing operating conditions in efforts to achieve improved efficiency and performance. Typically employed on highways with increasing recurrent traffic congestion and limited resources.
	(a) High-Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) Lanes--An exclusive lane for vehicles carrying the posted number of minimum occupants or carpools, either part time or full time.
	(b) High Occupancy Toll (HOT) Lanes--An HOV lane that allows vehicles qualified as carpools to use the facility without a fee, while vehicles containing less than the required number of occupants to pay a toll. Tolls may change based on real time conditions (dynamic) or according to a schedule (static).
	(c) Express Toll Lanes--Facilities in which all users are required to pay a toll, although HOVs may be offered a discount. Tolls may be dynamic or static.
(10)Merging. The converging of separate streams of traffic into a single stream.
(11)Running Time. The time the vehicle is in motion.
(12)Spacing. The distance between consecutive vehicles in a given lane, measured front to front.
(13)Speed.
	(a) Design Speed--A speed selected to establish specific minimum geometric design elements for a particular section of highway or bike path.
	(b) Operating Speed--The speed at which drivers are observed operating their vehicles during free-flow conditions. The 85th percentile of the distribution of a representative sample of observed speeds is used most frequently to measure the operating speed associated with a particular location or geometric feature.
	(c) Posted Speed--The speed limit determined by law and shown on the speed limit sign.
	(d) High Speed – A speed greater than 45 mph.
	(e) Low Speed – A speed less than or equal to 45 mph.
	(f) Running Speed--The speed over a specified section of highway, being the distance divided by running time. The average for all traffic, or component thereof, is the summation of distances divided by the summation of running times.
(14)Traffic. A general term used throughout this manual referring to the passage of people, vehicles and/or bicycles along a transportation route.
(15) Traffic Control Devices.
	(a) Markings--All pavement and curb markings, object markers, delineators, colored pavements, barricades, channelizing devices, and islands used to convey regulations, guidance, or warning to users.
	(b) Sign--Any traffic control device that is intended to communicate specific information to users through a word, symbol and/or arrow legend. Signs do not include highway traffic signals or pavement markings, delineators, or channelizing devices.
	(c) Highway Traffic Signal--A power-operated control device by which traffic is warned or directed to take a specific action. These devices do not include signals at toll plazas, power-operated signs, illuminated pavement markers, warning lights, or steady burning electrical lamps.
	(d) Changeable Message Sign--An electronic traffic sign used on roadways to give travelers information about traffic congestion, accidents, roadwork zones, speed limits or any dynamic information about current driving conditions.
(16)Volume. The number of vehicles passing a given point during a specified period of time.
(17)Weaving. The crossing of traffic streams moving in the same general direction accomplished by merging and diverging.
(18)Ramp Metering. A vehicular traffic management strategy which utilizes a system of traffic signals on freeway entrance and connector ramps to regulate the volume of vehicles entering a freeway corridor in order to maximize the efficiency of the freeway and thereby minimizing the total delay in the transportation corridor.

### 62.9 Drainage
See Chapter 800 for definition of drainage terms.

### 62.10 Users
(1) Bicycle. A device propelled via chain, belt or gears, exclusively by human power.
(2) Bus. Any vehicle owned or operated by a publicly owned or operated transit system, or operated under contract with a publicly owned or operated transit system, and used to provide to the general public, regularly scheduled transportation for which a fare is charged. A general public paratransit vehicle is not a transit bus.
(3) Bus Rapid Transit (BRT). A flexible rubber-tired rapid-transit mode that combines stations, vehicles, services, exclusive running ways, and Intelligent Transportation System elements into an integrated system with a strong positive identity that evokes a unique image.
(4) Commuter Rail. Traditional rapid and heavy rail passenger service intended to provide travel options in suburban and urban areas. Corridor lengths are typically shorter than intercity passenger rail services. Top operating speeds are in the range of 90 to 110 miles per hour. The tracks may or may not be shared with freight trains and typically are in a separate right of way.
(5) Conventional Rail. Traditional intercity passenger rail and interregional freight rail. Top operating speeds are in the range of 60 to 110 miles per hour. The tracks may or may not be shared by passenger and freight trains and typically run within their own right of way corridor.
(6) Design Vehicle. The largest vehicle commonly expected on a particular roadway. Descriptions of these vehicles are found in Index 404.4.
(7) Equestrian. A rider on horseback.
(8) High Speed Rail. A type of intercity and interregional passenger rail service that operates significantly faster than conventional rail. Top operating speeds are typically 150 to 220 miles per hour. These trains may be powered by overhead high voltage lines or technologies such as Maglev. The tracks are grade separated within a separate controlled access right of way and may or may not be shared with freight trains.
(9) Light Rail. A form of urban transit that uses rail cars on fixed rails in a right of way that may or may not be grade separated. Motorized vehicles and bicycles may share the same transportation corridor. These railcars are typically electrically driven with power supplied from an overhead line rather than an electrified third rail. Top operating speeds are typically 60 miles per hour.
(10) Pedestrian. A person who is afoot or who is using any of the following: (a) a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle, or (b) an electric personal assistive mobility device. Includes a person who is operating a self-propelled wheelchair, motorized tricycle, or motorized quadricycle and, by reason of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian as specified in part (a) above.
(11) Street Car, Trams or Trolley. A passenger rail vehicle which runs on tracks along public urban streets and also sometimes on separate rights of way. It may also run between cities and/or towns, and/or partially grade separated structures.
(12) Transit. Includes light rail; commuter rail; motorbus; street car, tram, trolley bus; BRT; automated guideway; and demand responsive vehicles. The most common application is for motorbus transit. See Index 404.4 for a description of the design vehicle as related to buses.
(13) Vehicle. A device to move, propel or draw a person upon a highway, except a device on rails or propelled exclusively by human power. This definition, abstracted from the CVC, is intended to refer to motor vehicles, excluding those devices necessary to provide mobility to persons with disabilities.

# CHAPTER 80 – APPLICATION OF DESIGN STANDARDS
## Topic 81 – Project Development Overview
#### Index 81.1 – Philosophy
The Project Development process seeks to provide a degree of mobility to users of the transportation system that is in balance with other values. In the development of transportation projects, social, economic, and environmental effects must be considered fully along with technical issues so that final decisions are made in the best overall public interest. Attention should be given to such considerations as:
(a) Need to provide transportation for all users (motorists, bicyclists, transit riders, and pedestrians) of the facility and transportation modes.
(b) Attainment of community goals and objectives.
(c) Needs of low mobility and disadvantaged groups.
(d) Costs and benefits of eliminating or minimizing adverse effects on natural resources, environmental values, public services, aesthetic values, and community and individual integrity.
(e) Planning based on realistic financial estimates.
(f) The cost, ease, and safety of maintaining whatever is built.
Proper consideration of these items requires that a facility be viewed from the perspectives of the user, the nearby community, and larger statewide interests. For the user, efficient travel, mode selection, and safety are paramount concerns. At the same time, the community often is more concerned about local aesthetic, social, and economic impacts. The general population, however, tends to be interested in how successfully a project functions as part of the overall transportation system and how large a share of available capital resources it consumes. Therefore, individual projects must be selected for construction on the basis of overall system benefits as well as community goals, plans, and values. Decisions must also emphasize the connectivity between the different transportation modes so that they work together effectively. The goal is to increase person and goods throughput, highway mobility and safety in a manner that is compatible with, or which enhances, adjacent community values and plans.

### 81.2 Highway Context
The context of a highway is a critical factor when developing the purpose and need statement for a project in addition to making fundamental design decisions such as its typical cross section and when selecting the design elements and aesthetic features such as street furniture and construction materials. Designing a highway that is sensitive to, and respectful of, the surrounding context is critical for project success in the minds of the Department and our stakeholders. A “one-size-fits-all” design philosophy is not Departmental policy. Designers need to be aware of and sensitive to land use, community context and the associated user needs of the facility. In some instances, the design criteria and standards in this manual are based on the land use contexts in which the State highway is located, for instance: large population areas and downtowns in urban areas, small rural towns and communities, suburban commercial/residential areas, and rural corridors. This approach ensures the standards are flexible, and the approach allows and encourages methods to minimize impacts on scenic, historic, archaeological, environmental, and other important resources. Beyond their intended transportation benefits, State highways can significantly impact the civic, social and economic conditions of local communities. Designing transportation facilities that integrate the local transportation and land uses while making the design responsive to the other needs of the community support the livability of the community and are usually a complementary goal to meeting the transportation needs of the users of the State highway system. To do this successfully, the designer needs to have an understanding of the area surrounding the highway and the users of the highway, its function within the regional and State transportation systems, (which includes all transportation modes), and the level of access control needed. To gain this understanding, the designer must consult the Transportation Concept Reports and work with the planning division and the local agencies. In this manual, the following concepts are used to discuss the context of a highway:
	• Place Type - the surrounding built and natural environment;
	• Type of Highway - the role the highway plays in terms of providing regional or interregional connectivity and local access; and,
	• Access Control - the degree of connection or separation between the highway and the surrounding land use.
A “Main Street” design is not specific to a certain place type, but is a design philosophy to be applied on State highways that also function as community streets. A “Main Street” design serves pedestrians, bicyclists, businesses and public transit with motorized traffic operating at speeds of 20 to 40 miles per hour. See the Department’s “Main Street, California” document for more information.

### 81.3 Place Types
A place type describes the area’s physical environment and the land uses surrounding the State highway. The place types described below are intentionally broad. Place types should be agreed upon in partnership with all of the project stakeholders; however, there likely may be more than one place type within the limits of a project. Ultimately, the place types selected can be used to determine the appropriate application of the guidance provided in this manual. These place type definitions are independent of the Federal government definitions of urban and rural areas. See Title 23 United States Code, Section 13 for further information. Identifying the appropriate place type(s) involves discussions with the project sponsors, ideally through the Project Development Team (PDT) process, and requires coordination with the land use planning activities associated with the on-going local and regional planning activities. Extensive community engagement throughout both the project planning and project development processes helps to formulate context sensitive project alternatives and transportation facilities that coordinate with the local land uses. The following place types are used in this manual:
	(1) Rural Areas. Rural areas are typically sparsely settled and developed. They can consist of protected federal and State lands, agricultural lands, and may include tourist and recreational destinations. However, as rural lands transition into rural communities, they can become more developed and suburban and urban-like by providing for a mixture of housing, commercial, industrial and public institutions. For the use of this manual, rural areas have been subcategorized as Natural Corridors, Developing Corridors and City/Town Centers (Rural Main Streets).
		(a) Natural Corridors. Typically, the desire in these corridors is to preserve the natural and scenic countryside while at the same time provide transportation services to support the travel and tourism that occurs when visiting these locations. Examples of this place type are: National/State Forests and Parklands; agricultural lands with scattered farm buildings and residences; and, low density development. See Topic 109 for additional information.
		(b) Developing Corridors. State highways traveling through these lands tend to be increasingly clustered with industrial, commercial, and residential areas as they lead into a rural city or town center. These corridors can be a transition zone among the aforementioned areas. Highways associated with these locations help to deliver tourists, but they also need to support the local communities and their local economies. In addition, these highways also serve a role and should be efficient at moving people and goods between regions. Industrial, commercial and retail buildings tend to be located separately from housing and are typically set back from the highway with parking areas placed in front. Truck traffic on these highways tends to serve the needs of these industrial, commercial and retail buildings; however, there will be a component of the truck traffic that is transporting their loads inter-regionally. Therefore, corridors in areas that are in transition may need to accommodate design vehicles.
		(c) City or Town Centers (Rural Main Streets). State highways in this scenario are usually a conventional main street through the rural city or town, or they may be the only main street. The use of the State highway in this environment varies depending upon the individual community, as does the mix of buildings, services, businesses, and public spaces. Transit is often present and should be incorporated into the transportation system as appropriate. Transportation improvement projects on these main street highways can be more complicated and costly than similar projects in more rural settings. A balance usually needs to be maintained between the needs of the through traffic and those of the local main street environment. Thus, analyzing the pedestrian and bicyclist needs early in the development of the project and then following through on the agreements during the design of highway projects in these locations can be especially important. Accommodating the pedestrian and bicyclist needs concurrently in projects leads to greater efficiency in the use of funding.
(2) Suburban Areas. Suburban areas lead into and can completely surround urban areas. A mixture of land uses is typical in suburban areas. This land use mixture can consist of housing, retail businesses and services, and may include regional centers such as shopping malls and other similar regional destinations; which are usually associated with suburban communities (cities and towns) that can be connected with larger urban centers and cities. Assessing the needs of pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit users in concert with the vehicular needs of motorists and truck drivers is necessary during the project planning, development and design of highway projects in these locations. Accommodating all of these needs concurrently into a project leads to greater efficiency in the use of funding. For the use of this manual, suburban areas have been categorized as either Lower Density/Residential Neighborhoods or Higher Density/Regional Community Centers (Suburban Main Streets).
	(a) Lower Density / Residential Neighborhoods. State highways typically do not cross through this place type. This place type usually feeds users onto the State highway system and is typically under the jurisdiction of a local entity. State highways, if they do interact with this place type, usually just connect at the edges of them where the pedestrians, bicyclists, and motor vehicle operators integrate into the highway system that includes transit facilities.
	(b) Higher Density / Regional Community Centers (Suburban Main Streets). As suburban areas grow they tend to merge together into each other’s boundaries. Growth in some locations can create “Megacommunities.” While these megacommunities seem to function as individual cities, they typically have multiple distinct community centers that require highways with the capacity to serve not only each center, but the center- to-center traveler needs. These areas typically require the State highway to serve not only the originally urbanized area, but also the newer suburban areas that have been created where the housing, shopping and employment opportunities are all centered. Anticipating and accommodating growth in this place type can be a challenge. State and local governments, the business community and citizens groups, and metropolitan planning organizations all need to agree on how to meet the community needs, and at times the interregional needs of the highway.
(3) Urban and Urbanized Areas. Urban areas generally are the major population centers in the State. Large numbers of people live in these urbanized areas where growth is expected to continue. Bicycling, transit, and walking are important transportation modes in these areas and as the facilities for pedestrians, transit and bicyclists expand in these areas, the percentage and number of travelers walking, using transit and bicycling is also likely to increase. State agencies and the local governmental entities, the business community and citizens groups, congestion management agencies and the local/regional metropolitan planning organization (MPO) need to all agree upon the concept of the transportation facilities being provided so that the community needs can be met. Urban areas are typically high-density locations such as central business districts, downtown communities, and major activity centers. They have a full range of land uses and are associated with a large diversity of activities. For the use of place types in this manual, urban areas have been categorized as Lower Density Parklands and Residential Neighborhoods and Higher Density Urban Main Streets. Higher Density Urban Main Streets have been further characterized as Community Centers and Downtown Cores.
	(a) Lower Density Parklands and Residential Neighborhoods. Large numbers of people live in these urbanized areas and bicycling, transit and walking are important transportation modes in these areas. Parklands can enhance these neighborhoods and parkland preservation is a concern, as well as, access to support travel and tourism to the parklands.
	(b) High Density Urban Main Streets.
		• Community Centers or Corridor. Strategically improving the design and function of the existing State highways that cross these centers is typically a concern. Providing transportation options to enhancing these urban neighborhoods that combine highway, transit, passenger rail, walking, and biking options are desirable, while they also help promote tourism and shopping.
		• Downtown Cores. Similar to community centers, much of the transportation system has already been built and its footprint in the community needs to be preserved while its use may need to be reallocated. Successfully meeting the mobility needs of a major metropolitan downtown core area requires a balanced approach. Such an approach is typically used to enhance the existing transportation network’s performance by adding capacity to the highways, sidewalks, and transit stations for all of the users of the system, and/or adding such enhancement features as HOV lanes, BRT, walkable corridors, etc. Right of way is limited and costly to purchase in these locations. Delivery truck traffic that supports the downtown core businesses can also create problems.
	The HEPGIS tool on the FHWA website is available to determine if the project is in an urban area. Urban areas are found on the Highway Information tab of the tool.
	
### 81.4 Type of Highway
Much of the following terminology is either already discussed in Chapter 20 or defined in Topic 62. The additional information in this portion of the manual is being provided to connect these terms with the guidance that is being provided.
(1) Functional Classification. One of the first steps in the highway design process is to define the function that the facility is to serve. The two major considerations in functionally classifying a highway are access and throughput. Access and mobility are inversely related; as access is increased, mobility decreases. In the AASHTO “A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets”, highways are functionally classified first as either urban or rural. The hierarchy of the functional highway system within either an urban or rural area consists of the following:
	• Principal arterial - main movement (high mobility, limited access) Typically 4 lanes or more;
	• Minor arterial - interconnects principal arterials (moderate mobility, limited access) Typically 2 or 3 lanes with turn lanes to benefit through traffic;
	• Collectors - connects local roads to arterials (moderate mobility, moderate access) with few businesses; and,
	• Local roads and streets - permits access to abutting land (high access, limited mobility).
The California Road System (CRS) maps are the official functional classification maps approved by FHWA. These maps show functional classification of roads. See the link at https://caltrans.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=026e830c914c495797c969a3e5668538.
(2) Interstate Highways. The interstate highway system was originally designed to be high- speed interregional connectors and it is a portion of the National Highway System (NHS). In urban and suburban areas, a large percentage of vehicular traffic is carried on the interstate highway system, rather than on the local arterials and streets.
(3) State Routes. The State highway system is described in the California Streets and Highway Code, Division 1, Chapter 2 and they are further defined in this manual in Topic 62.3, Highway Types which provides definitions for freeways, expressways, and highways.

### 81.5 Access Control
Index 62.3 defines a controlled access highway and a conventional highway. The level of access control plays a part in determining the design standards that are to be utilized when designing a highway. See Index 405.6 for additional access control guidance.

### 81.6 Design Standards and Highway Context
The design standards were initially established to increase highway mobility and development, promoting a State transportation system that operated at selected levels of service consistent with projected traffic volumes and highway classification. Design standards revolved around FHWA’s controlling criteria, evolving over time to more fully consider adjacent community values, local decisions making, and area context. The design guidance and standards in this manual have been developed with the intent of ensuring that:
	• Designers have the ability to design for all modes of travel (vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian, truck and transit); and,
	• Designers have the flexibility to tailor a project to the unique circumstances that relate to it and its location, while meeting driver expectation to achieve established project goals.
Designers should balance the interregional transportation needs with the needs of the communities they pass through. The design of projects should, when possible, expand the options for biking, walking, and transit use. In planning and designing projects, the project development team should work with locals that have any livable policies as revitalizing urban centers, building local economies, and preserving historic sites and scenic country roads. The “Main Streets: Flexibility in Planning, Design and Operations” published by the Department should be consulted for additional guidance as should the FHWA publication “Flexibility in Highway Design”. Early consultation and discussion with the Project Delivery Coordinator and the District Design Liaison during the Project Initiation Document (PID) phase is also necessary to avoid issues that may arise later in the project development process. Design Information Bulletin 78 “Design Checklist for the Development of Geometric Plans” is a tool that can be used to identify and discuss design features that may deviate from standard.

## Topic 82 – Application of Standards
### 82.1 Highway Design Manual Standards
(1) General. The highway design criteria and policies in this manual provide a guide for the engineer to exercise sound judgment in applying standards, consistent with the above Project Development philosophy, in the design of projects. This guidance allows for flexibility in applying design standards and documenting design decisions that take the context of the project location into consideration; which enables the designer to tailor the design, as appropriate, for the specific circumstances while maintaining safety. The design standards used for any project should equal or exceed the minimum given in the Manual to the maximum extent feasible, taking into account costs (initial and life- cycle), traffic volumes, traffic and safety benefits, project goals, travel modes, facility type, right of way, socio-economic and environmental impacts, maintenance, etc. Because design standards have evolved over many years, many existing highways do not conform fully to current standards. It is not intended that current manual standards be applied retroactively to all existing State highways; such is neither warranted nor economically feasible. However, when warranted, upgrading of existing roadway features such as guardrail, lighting, superelevation, roadbed width, etc., should be considered, either as independent projects or as part of larger projects. A record of the decision not to upgrade existing non-standard design features are to be provided through the process described in Index 82.2. This manual does not address temporary construction features. It is recognized that the construction conditions encountered are so diverse and variable that it is not practical to set geometric criteria. Guidance for use of traffic control devices for temporary construction zones can be found in Part 6 – Temporary Traffic Control of the California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (California MUTCD). Guidance for the engineering of pavements in temporary construction zones is available in Index 612.6. In this manual, design standards and guidance are described as follows (see Index 82.4 for other procedural requirements):
(2) Absolute Requirements. Design guidance related to requirements of law, policy, or statute that do not allow exception are phrased by the use of “must,” “is required,” “without exception,” “are to be,” “is to be,” “in no event,” or a combination of these terms.
(3) Controlling Criteria. The FHWA has designated the following ten controlling criteria for projects on the National Highway System (NHS) as comprehensive design standards which cover a multitude of design characteristics, allowing flexibility in application: [1]
	• Design Speed
	• Lane Width
	• Shoulder Width
	• Horizontal Curve Radius
	• Superelevation Rate
	• Stopping Sight Distance
	• Maximum Grade
	• Cross Slope
	• Vertical Clearance
	• Design Loading Structural Capacity (non-geometric)
Design loading structural capacity criteria applies to all NHS facility types. See the Technical Publications – DES Manuals for further information. The remaining geometric criteria listed above are applicable to the NHS as follows: (1) On high-speed roadways (Interstate highways, other freeways, and roadways with design speeds of greater than or equal to 50 mph), all the geometric criteria apply. The stopping sight distance criteria applies to horizontal alignments and vertical alignments except for sag vertical curves; and (2) On low-speed roadways (non-freeways with design speeds less than 50 mph), only the design speed criteria applies. The two speed categories stated above that FHWA designates match the high- and low- speed definitions in Index 62.8(13) when considering that design speed and posted speed are set in 5 mph increments. The design standards related to the geometric criteria are identified in Table 82.1A among other important geometric standards in this manual regardless of the design speed of the roadway and whether or not the roadway is part of the NHS.
(4) Standards. Design standards are those considered most essential to achievement of overall design objectives. Many pertain to requirements of law or regulations such as those embodied in the FHWA's ten controlling criteria (see Index 82.1(3)). In addition to the FHWA’s ten controlling criteria are “Caltrans-only” standards that have been identified by Caltrans as most essential pertaining to requirements of State law, policy or objectives. The design standards are shown in this manual as either Boldface type (listed in Table 82.1A) or Underlined type (listed in Table 82.1B) to indicate the approval authority for nonstandard design according to Index 82.2.
(5) Decision Requiring Other Approvals. There are design criteria decisions that are not bold or underlined text which require specific approvals from individuals to whom such decisions have been delegated. These individuals include, but are not limited to, District Directors, Project Delivery Coordinators or their combination as specified in this manual. These decisions should be documented as the individual approving desires.
(6) Permissive Standards. All guidance other than absolute requirements, standards, or decisions requiring other approvals, whether indicated by the use of “should”, “may”, or “can” are permissive.
(7) Other Caltrans Publications. In addition to the design standards in this manual, see Index 82.7 for general information on the Department’s traffic engineering policy, standards, practices and study warrants. Caution must be exercised when using other Caltrans publications which provide guidelines for the design of highway facilities, such as HOV lanes. These publications do not contain design standards; moreover, the designs suggested in these publications do not always meet Highway Design Manual Standards. Therefore, all other Caltrans publications must be used in conjunction with this manual.
(8) Transportation Facilities Under the Jurisdiction of Others. Generally, if the local road or street is a Federal-aid route it should conform to AASHTO standards; see Topic 308 – Cross Sections for Roads Under Other Jurisdictions. Occasionally though, projects on the State highway system involve work on adjacent transportation facilities that are under the jurisdiction of cities and counties. Some of these local jurisdictions may have published standards for facilities that they own and operate. The guidance in this manual may be applicable, but it was prepared for use on the State highway system. Thus, when project work impacts adjacent transportation facilities that are under the jurisdiction of cities and counties, local standards and AASHTO guidance must be used in conjunction with this manual to encourage designs that are sensitive to the local context and community values. Agreeing on which standards will be used needs to be decided early in the project delivery process and on a project by project basis.

### 82.2 Approvals for Nonstandard Design
(1) Boldface Standards. Design features or elements which deviate from standards indicated in boldface type require the approval of the Chief, Division of Design. This approval authority has been delegated to the District Directors for projects on conventional highways and expressways, and for certain other facilities in accordance with the current District Design Delegation Agreement. Approval authority for design standards indicated in boldface type on all other facilities has been delegated to the Project Delivery Coordinators except as noted in Table 82.1A where: (a) the standard has been delegated to the District Director, (b) the standards in Chapters 600 through 680 requires the approval of the State Pavement Engineer, and (c) specifically delegated to the District Director per the current District Design Delegation Agreements and may involve coordination with the Project Delivery Coordinator. See the HQ Division of Design website for the most current District Design Delegation Agreements. The current procedures and documentation requirements pertaining to the approval process for deviation from design standards indicated in boldface type as well as the dispute resolution process are contained in Chapter 21 of the Project Development Procedures Manual (PDPM). Design exception approval must be obtained pursuant to the instructions in PDPM Chapter 9. The Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21) of 2012 allowed significant delegation to the states by FHWA to approve and administer portions of the Federal-Aid Transportation Program. MAP-21 further allowed delegation to the State DOT’s and in response to this a Stewardship and Oversight Agreement (SOA) document between FHWA and Caltrans was signed. The SOA outlines the process to determine specific project related delegation to Caltrans. In general, the SOA delegates approval of deviations from design standards related to the ten controlling criteria on all Interstate projects whether FHWA has oversight responsibilities or not to Caltrans. Exceptions to this delegation would be for projects of FHWA Division Interest, which are determined on a project by project basis. See Index 43.2 for additional information. Consultation with FHWA should be sought as early in the project development process as possible. However, formal FHWA approval, if applicable, shall not be requested until the appropriate Caltrans representative has approved the design decision document. FHWA approval is not required for deviations from "Caltrans-only" standards. Table 82.1A identifies these “Caltrans-only” standards. Where FHWA approval of a deviation from a design standard is required, only cite the standards that are identified by the FHWA as ten controlling criteria, see Index 82.1(3). For local facilities crossing the State right of way see Index 308.1.
(2) Underlined Standards. The authority to approve deviations from standards indicated in underlined type has been delegated to the District Directors. A list of these standards is provided in Table 82.1B. Proposals for deviations from these standards can be discussed with the District Design Liaison during development of the approval documentation. The responsibility for the establishment of procedures for review, documentation, and long term retention of approved design decisions from these standards has also been delegated to the District Directors.
(3) Decisions Requiring Other Approvals. The authority to approve specific decisions identified in the text are also listed in Table 82.1C. The form of documentation or other instructions are provided as directed by the approval authority.
(4) Permissive Standards. A record of deviation from permissive standards and the disclosure of the engineering decisions in support of the deviation should be documented and placed in the project file. This principle of documentation also applies when following other Division of Design guidance, e.g., Design Information Bulletins and Design Memos. The form of documentation and other instructions on long term retention of these engineering decisions are to be provided as directed by the District approval authority.
(5) Local Agencies. Cities and counties are responsible for the design decisions they make on transportation facilities they own and operate. The responsible local entity is delegated authority to exercise their engineering judgment when utilizing the applicable design guidance and standards, including those for bicycle facilities established by Caltrans pursuant to the Streets and Highways Code Sections 890.6 and 890.8 and published in this manual. For further information on this delegation and the delegation process, see the Caltrans Local Assistance Procedures Manual, Chapter 11.

### 82.3 FHWA and AASHTO Standards and Policies
The standards in this manual generally conform to the standards and policies set forth in the AASHTO publications, "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets" (2018) and "A Policy on Design Standards-Interstate System" (2016). A third AASHTO publication, the latest edition of the "Roadside Design Guide", focuses on creating safer roadsides. These three documents, along with other AASHTO and FHWA publications cited in 23 CFR Ch 1, Part 625, Appendix A, contain most of the current AASHTO policies and standards, and are approved references to be used in conjunction with this manual. AASHTO policies and standards, which are established as nationwide standards, do not always satisfy California conditions. When standards differ, the instructions in this manual govern, except when necessary for FHWA project approval (Index 108.7, Coordination with the FHWA). The use of publications and manuals that are developed by organizations other than the FHWA and AASHTO can also provide additional guidance not covered in this manual. The use of such guidance coupled with sound engineering judgment is to be exercised in collaboration with the guidance in this manual.

### 82.4 Mandatory Procedural Requirements
Required procedures and policies for which Caltrans is responsible, relating to project clearances, permits, licenses, required tests, documentation, value engineering, etc., are indicated by use of the word "must". Procedures and actions to be performed by others (subject to notification by Caltrans), or statements of fact are indicated by the word "will".

### 82.5 Effective Date for Implementing Revisions to Design Standards 
Revisions to design standards will be issued with a stated effective date. It is understood that all projects will be designed to current standards unless a design decision has been approved in accordance with Index 82.2 or otherwise noted by separate Design Memorandum. On projects where the project development process has started, the following conditions on the effective date of the new or revised standards will be applied: For all projects where the PS&E has not been finalized, the new or revised design standards shall be incorporated unless this would impose a significant delay in the project schedule or a significant increase in the project engineering or construction costs. The Project Delivery Coordinator or individual delegated authority must make the final determination on whether to apply the new or previous design standards on a project-by-project basis for roadway features.
• For all projects where the PS&E has been submitted to Headquarters Office Engineer for advertising or the project is under construction, the new or revised standards will be incorporated only if they are identified in the Change Transmittal as requiring special implementation.
For locally-sponsored projects, the Oversight Engineer must inform the funding sponsor within 15 working days of the effective date of any changes in design standards as defined in Index 82.2.

### 82.6 Design Information Bulletins and Other Caltrans Publications
In addition to the design standards in this manual, Design Information Bulletins (DIBs) establish policies and procedures for the various design specialties of the Department that are in the Division of Design. Some DIBs may eventually become part of this manual, while others are written with the intention to remain as design guidance in the DIB format. References to DIBs are made in this manual by the “base” DIB number only and considered to be the latest version available on the Department Design website. See the Department Design website for further information concerning DIB numbering protocol and postings. Caution must be exercised when using other Caltrans publications, which provide guidelines for the design of highway facilities, such as HOV lanes. These publications do not contain design standards; moreover, the designs suggested in these publications do not always meet Highway Design Manual Standards. Therefore, all other Caltrans publications must be used in conjunction with this manual.

### 82.7 Traffic Engineering
The Division of Traffic Operations maintains engineering policy, standards, practices and study warrants to direct and guide decision-making on a broad range of design and traffic engineering features and systems, which are provided to meet the site-specific safety and mobility needs of all highway users. The infrastructure within a highway or freeway corridor, segment, intersection or interchange is not “complete” for drivers, bicyclists and pedestrians unless it includes the appropriate traffic control devices; traffic safety systems; operational features or strategies; and traffic management elements and or systems. The presence or absence of these traffic elements and systems can have a profound effect on safety and operational performance. As such, they are commonly employed to remediate performance deficiencies and to optimize the overall performance of the “built” highway system. For additional information visit the Division of Traffic Operations website at http://www.dot.ca.gov/trafficops/.

┌───────────────────────────┐
│Table 82.1 Has Been Skipped│
└───────────────────────────┘

# CHAPTER 100 – BASIC DESIGN POLICIES
## Topic 101 – Design Speed
#### Index 101.1 – Highway Design Speed
(1) General. Highway design speed is defined as: "a speed selected to establish specific minimum geometric design elements for a particular section of highway". These design elements include vertical and horizontal alignment, and sight distance. Other features such as widths of pavement and shoulders, horizontal clearances, etc., are generally not directly related to highway design speed. A highway carrying a higher volume of traffic may justify a higher design speed than a lower classification facility in similar topography, particularly where the savings in user operation and other costs are sufficient to offset the increased cost of right of way and construction. A lower design speed, however, should not be assumed for a secondary road where the topography is such that drivers are likely to travel at higher speeds. It is preferable that the design speed for any section of highway be a constant value. However, during the detailed design phase of a project, situations may arise in which engineering, economic, environmental, or other considerations make it impractical to provide the minimum elements for other design standards (e.g., curve radius, stopping sight distance, etc.) established by the design speed. See Topic 82 for documenting localized exceptions to features preventing the standard design speed. The cost to correct such restrictions may not be justified. Technically, this will result in a reduction in the effective design speed at the location in question. Such technical reductions in design speed shall be discussed with and documented as required by the District approval authority or Project Delivery Coordinator depending upon the current District Design Delegation Agreement. Where a reason for limiting speed is obvious to approaching drivers or bicyclists, these users are more apt to accept a lower operating speed than where there is no apparent reason for it.
(2) Selection. Selecting the design speed for a highway is part of the Project Development Team process. See the Project Development Procedures Manual for additional guidance.
	(a) Considerations--The chosen design speed, for a highway segment or project, needs to take into consideration the following:
		• The selected design speed should be consistent with the operating speeds that are likely to be expected on a given highway facility. Drivers and bicyclists adjust their speed based on their perception of the physical limitations of the highway and its vehicular and bicycle traffic. In addition, bicycling and walking can be encouraged when bicyclists and pedestrians perceive an increase in safety due to lower vehicular speeds.
		• In California the majority of State highway projects modify existing facilities. When modifying existing facilities, the design speed selected should reflect the observed motor vehicle speed (operating speed) or the anticipated operating speed upon completion of modifications. Generally the posted speed is a reliable indicator of operating speed although operating speeds frequently exceed posted speeds.   Speed limits and speed zones are discussed in Chapter 2 of the California MUTCD, which include references to the California Vehicle Code. For existing limited access highways and conventional highways in rural areas other than Main Streets, the selected design speed for these higher-speed facilities typically is 15 to 20 mph higher than the observed motor vehicle speed (operating speed). For existing lower-speed conventional highways in urban areas and rural highways that are Main Streets with observed or proposed operating speeds of 45 mph or less, the design speed should be selected to be consistent with the highway context which may discourage high-speed operating behavior. Select a design speed that is logical with respect to topography, operating speed (or anticipated operating speed if the corridor is being redesigned and the physical characteristics of the highway are being changed), adjacent land use, design volumes for all users, collision history, access control, and facility type. On projects where posted speeds or observational data is not available, the choice of design speed is influenced principally by whether the area is rural or urban, the character of terrain, economic considerations, environmental factors, type and anticipated volume of vehicular traffic, presence of non-motorized traffic, functional classification of the highway, existing and planned adjacent land use. A highway in level or rolling terrain justifies a higher design speed than one in mountainous terrain. As discussed under Topic 109, scenic values are also a consideration in the selection of a design speed.
	(b) Freeways and Expressways--In addition to the considerations above, as high a design speed as feasible should be selected for use on freeways and expressways, which are higher-speed facilities.
	(c) Conventional Highways
		(1) State Highways. In addition to the considerations above, the existing and planned highway context in terms of area place type, land use, types of users, etc. influence the selection of the appropriate design speed and should be taken into account by the Project Development Team. Consideration should also be given to Local Agency standards and transportation plans for the facility when selecting the design speed.
		(2) Local Streets or Roads. Local streets or roads within the State right of way, including facilities which will be relinquished after construction (such as frontage roads), shall have minimum design speeds conforming to AASHTO standards, as per the functional classification of the facility in question. If the local agency having jurisdiction over the facility in question maintains design standards that exceed AASHTO standards, then the local agency standards should apply. Where the local facility connects to a freeway or expressway (such as ramp terminal intersections), the design speed of the local facility shall be a minimum of 35 miles per hour. However, the design speed should be 45 miles per hour when feasible. Every effort should be made to avoid decreasing the design speed of a local facility through the State's right of way, and all due consideration should be given to local plans to upgrade or improve the facility in the near future.

### 101.2 Highway Design Speed Standards
Table 101.2 shows appropriate ranges of design speeds that shall be used for the various types of facilities, place types, and conditions listed. For additional guidance, see Index 101.1(2).

Table 101.2 Vehicular Design Speed

 Facility Type                                    Design Speed(mph)
┌───LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS──────────────────────────────────┬─────┐
│             Freeways and expressways in mountainous terrain│50-80│
│                                     Freeways in urban areas│55-80│
│                     Freeways and expressways in rural areas│70-80│
│                                  Expressways in urban areas│50-70│
│                                                            │     │
├───CONVENTIONAL HIGHWAYS (2)────────────────────────Rural───┤     │
│                                                Flat terrain│55-70│
│                                             Rolling terrain│50-60│
│                                         Mountainous terrain│40-50│
│        Main Streets — Cities, Towns, and Community C.enters│30-40│
├───CONVENTIONAL HIGHWAYS (2)────────────────────────Urban───┤40-50│
│                                     Arterials — Throuqhways│30-40│
│     Arterials - Main Streets and Regional/Community Centers│30   │
│                                  Downtowns and City Centers│     │
├───LOCAL FACILITIES (Within State right of way)─────────────┤     │
│Facilities crossing a freeway or expressway, connecting to a│AASH-│
│         conventional highway or traversing a State facility│TO(1)│
│            Facilities connecting to a freeway or expressway│35/45│
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┴─────┘
(1) (AASHTO) If outside of State right of way and no specific local standards apply, the minimum design speed shall be 30 miles per hour.
(2) For conventional highways eligible or designated as State scenic highways, see Index 109.2.

## Topic 102 – Design Capacity & Level of Service
### 102.1 Design Capacity (Automobiles)
Design capacity (automobiles) is the maximum volume of vehicle traffic for which a projected highway can provide a selected level of service. Design capacity varies with a number of factors, including:
	(a) Level of service selected.
	(b) Width of lanes.
	(c) Number of lanes.
	(d) Presence or absence of shoulders.
	(e) Grades.
	(f) Horizontal alignment.
	(g) Operating speed.
	(h) Lateral clearance.
	(i) Side friction generated by parking, drive ways, intersections, and interchanges.
	(j) Volumes of trucks, transit, recreational vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians.
	(k) Spacing and timing of traffic signals, and the required timing to accommodate pedestrian crossing
Level of Service (LOS) is largely related to speed and density among many variables. Freeways should be designed to accommodate the design year peak hour traffic volumes and to operate at a LOS determined by District Planning and/or Traffic Operations. For a rough approximation of the number of lanes required on a multilane freeway, use the following design year peak hour traffic volumes per lane at the specified LOS:
.					
           Design Year Peak Hour Vehicle Traffic Volume
       LOS (Average Automobiles Per Lane Per Hour)
┌─────┬───┬────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│Urban│C-E│1400-2400                                   │
│Rural│C-D│1000-1850                                   │
└─────┴───┴────────────────────────────────────────────┘
For conventional highways and expressways, District Planning and Traffic Operations should be consulted. Automobile traffic volumes can be adjusted for the effect of grades and the mix of automobiles, trucks, and recreational vehicles if a more refined calculation is desired. In those cases, consult the "Highway Capacity Manual", published by the Transportation Research Board

### 102.2 Design Capacity and Quality of Service (Pedestrians and Bicycles)
Sidewalks are to accommodate pedestrians at a Level of Service (LOS) equal to that of vehicles using the roadway, or better. More detailed guidance on design capacity for sidewalks is available in the “Highway Capacity Manual” (HCM), published by the Transportation Research Board. The HCM also has guidance regarding LOS for bicycle facilities for both on- and off–street applications. The LOS for on-street bicycle facilities should be equal to that of vehicles using the roadway or better. The design of off-street bicycle facilities can use the LOS methodology in the HCM when conditions justify deviations from the standards in Chapter 1000.

## Topic 103 – Design Designation [1]
### 103.1 Relation to Design
The design designation is a simple, concise expression of the basic factors controlling the design of a given highway. Following is an example of this expression:
ADT(2015)= 9800
ADT(2035)= 20000
DHV= 3000
ESAL= 4500000
D= 60%
T= 12%
V= 70mph
TI_20= 11.0
CLIMATEREGION= Desert

The notation above is explained as follows:
ADT(2015) -- The average daily traffic, in number of vehicles, for the construction year.
ADT(2035) -- The average daily traffic for the future year used as a target in design.
CLIMATE REGION -- Climate Region as defined in Topic 615. In addition to establishing design requirements for the project, this information is used by the Resident Engineer during construction to determine which clauses in the Standard Specifications apply to the project.
DHV -- The two-way design hourly volume, vehicles.
D -- The percentage of the DHV in the direction of heavier flow.
ESAL -- The equivalent single axle loads forecasted for pavement engineering. See Topic 613.
T -- The truck traffic volume expressed as a percent of the DHV (excluding recreational vehicles).
TI20 -- Traffic Index used for pavement engineering. The number in the subscript is the pavement design life used for pavement design. See Index 613.3(5).
V -- Design speed in miles per hour.

Within a project, one design designation should be used except when:
(a) The design hourly traffic warrants a change in the number of lanes, or
(b) A change in conditions dictates a change in design speed.
(c) The design daily truck traffic warrants a change in the Traffic Index.
The design designation should be stated in project initiation documents and project reports and should appear on the typical cross section for all new, reconstructed, or rehabilitation (including Capital Preventative Maintenance) highway construction projects.

### 103.2 Design Period
Geometric design of new facilities and reconstruction projects should typically be based on estimated traffic 20 years after completion of construction. For new facilities and reconstruction projects on the Interstate System a minimum 20-year design period is required. With justification, for projects other than on the Interstate System, design periods less than 20 years may be approved by the District Director with concurrence by the Project Delivery Coordinator. For roundabout design period guidance, see Index 405.10. Safety, Resurfacing, Restoration, and Rehabilitation (RRR), and operational improvement projects should be designed on the basis of current ADT, including projects on the Interstate System. Complimentary to the design period, various components of a project (e.g., drainage facilities, structures, pavement structure, etc.) have a design life that may differ from the design period. For pavement design life requirements, see Topic 612.

## Topic 104 – Control of Access
### 104.1 General Policy
Control of access is achieved by acquiring rights of access to the highway from abutting property owners and by permitting ingress and egress only at locations determined by the State. On freeways, direct access from private property to the highway is prohibited without exception. Abutting ownerships are served by frontage roads or streets connected to interchanges.

### 104.2 Access Openings
See Index 205.1 for the definition and criteria for location of access openings. The number of access openings on highways with access control should be held to a minimum. (Private property access openings on freeways are not allowed.) Parcels which have access to another public road or street as well as frontage on the expressway are not allowed access to the expressway. In some instances, parcels fronting only on the expressway may be given access to another public road or street by constructing suitable connections if such access can be provided at reasonable cost. With the exception of extensive highway frontages, access openings to an expressway are limited to one opening per parcel. Wherever possible, one opening should serve two or more parcels. In the case of a large highway frontage under one ownership, the cost of limiting access to one opening may be prohibitive, or the property may be divided by a natural barrier such as a stream or ridge, making it necessary to provide an additional opening. In the latter case, it may be preferable to connect the physically separated portions with a low-cost structure or road rather than permit two openings.

### 104.3 Frontage Roads
(1) General Policy.
	(a) Purpose--Frontage roads are provided on freeways and expressways to:
		• Control access to the through lanes, thus increasing safety for traffic.
		• Provide access to abutting land ownerships.
		• Provide or restore continuity of the local street or road systems.
		• Provide for bicycle and pedestrian traffic that might otherwise need to use the freeway.
	(b) Economic Considerations--In general, a frontage road is justified on freeways and expressways if the costs of constructing the frontage road are less than the costs of providing access by other means. Right of way considerations often are a determining factor. Thus, a frontage road would be justified if the investment in construction and extra right of way is less than either the severance damages or the costs of acquiring the affected property in its entirety. Frontage roads may be required to connect parts of a severed property or to serve a landlocked parcel resulting from right of way acquisition.
	(c) Access Openings--Direct access to the through lanes is allowable on expressways. When the number of access openings on one side of the expressway exceeds three in 1,600 feet, a frontage road should be provided (see Index 104.2).
(2) New Alignment. Frontage roads generally are not provided on freeways or expressways on new alignment since the abutting property owners never had legal right of access to the new facility. They may be provided, however, on the basis of considerations mentioned in (1) above.
(3) Existing Alignment. Where a freeway or expressway is developed parallel to an existing highway or local street, all or part of the existing roadway often is retained as a frontage road. In such cases, if access to remainders of land on the side of the freeway or expressway right of way opposite the old road cannot be provided by other means, a frontage road must be constructed to serve the landlocked remainders or the remainders must be purchased outright. The decision whether to provide access or purchase should be based on considerations of cost, right of way impacts, street system continuity and similar factors (see (1) above).
(4) Railroad Crossings. Frontage roads on one or both sides of a freeway or expressway on new alignment, owing to safety and cost considerations, frequently are terminated at the railroad right of way. When terminating a frontage road at the railroad crossing, bicycle and pedestrian traffic still needs to have reasonable access through the community. Any new railroad grade crossings and grade separations, and any relocations or alterations of existing crossings must be cleared with the railroad and approved by the PUC.
(5) Frontage Roads Financed by Others. Frontage roads which are not a State responsibility under this policy may be built by the State upon request of a local political subdivision, a private agency, or an individual. Such a project must be covered by an agreement under which the State is reimbursed for all construction, right of way, and engineering costs involved.

### 104.4 Protection of Access Rights
For proper control of acquired access rights, fencing or other approved barriers shall be installed on all controlled access highways except as provided in Index 701.2(3)(e).

### 104.5 Relation of Access Opening to a Median Opening
Access openings should not be placed within 300 feet of a median opening unless the access opening is directly opposite the median opening. Details on access openings are given under Index 205.1.

### 104.6 Maintaining Local Community Access
When planning and designing a new freeway or expressway, the designer needs to consider the impacts of an access controlled facility on the local community. Closing non-expressway local road connections may negatively impact access for pedestrians, bicyclists and equestrians. A new facility may inadvertently sever local non-motorized access creating long out of direction travel. Designers need to coordinate with local agencies for access needs across an access controlled facility.

### 104.7 Cross References
(a) Access Control at Intersections at Grade (see Index 405.6).
(b) Access Control at Interchanges (see Index 504.8).

## Topic 105 – Pedestrian Facilities
### 105.1 General Policy
The California Vehicle Code Section 21949 has stated a policy for the Department to provide safe and convenient travel for pedestrians. Conventional highways can be used by pedestrians. Although the Department will work to provide safe and convenient pedestrian travel on these highways, not all of these highways will contain sidewalks and walkways. Connections between different modes of travel should be considered when designing highway facilities, as all people may become pedestrians when transferring to a transit based facility. Pedestrian use near transit facilities should be considered during the planning phase of transportation improvement projects. See DIB 82 for accessibility guidance of pedestrian facilities. See also Topics 115 and 116 for guidance regarding designing for bicycle traffic.

### 105.2 Sidewalks and Walkways
The design of sidewalks and walkways varies depending on the setting, standards, and requirements of local agencies. Sidewalks are desirable on conventional highways and on other areas of State highway right of way to serve pedestrians when warranted by sufficient population, density and development. Coordination with the local agency that the State highway passes through is needed to determine the appropriate time to provide sidewalks. Most local agencies in California have adopted varying design standards for urban and rural areas, as well as more specific requirements that are applicable to residential settings, downtowns, special districts, and other place types. These standards are typically tied to zoning requirements for land use established by local agencies. These land use decisions should take into account the ultimate need for public right of way, including the transportation needs of bicyclists and pedestrians. The minimum width of a sidewalk should be 8 feet between a curb and a building when in urban and rural main street place types. For all other locations the minimum width of sidewalk should be 6 feet when contiguous to a curb or 5 feet when separated by a planting strip. Sidewalk width does not include curbs. See Index 208.4 for bridge sidewalks. Using the minimum width may not be enough to satisfy the actual need if additional width is necessary to maintain an acceptable Level of Service (LOS) for pedestrians. Note that street furniture, buildings, utility poles, light fixtures and platoon generators, such as window displays and bus stops, can reduce the effective width of sidewalks and likewise the LOS of the walkway. Also, adequate width for curb ramps and driveways are other important accessibility considerations. See Index 205.3(6) and the Standard Plans for sidewalk requirements at driveways. See Index 208.6 for information on pedestrian overcrossings and undercrossings and Index 208.4 for sidewalks on bridges. “A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets”, issued by AASHTO, and the “Highway Capacity Manual”, published by the Transportation Research Board contain pedestrian LOS criteria. These are means of measuring the ability of the existing pedestrian facilities to provide pedestrian mobility and to determine the need for improvements or expansions. If adequate capacity is not provided, pedestrian mobility may be seriously impeded. Traffic volume-pedestrian warrants for sidewalks or other types of walkways along highways have not been established. In general, whenever the roadside and land development conditions are such that pedestrians regularly move along a highway, those pedestrians should be furnished with a sidewalk or other walkway, as is suitable to the conditions. Sidewalks are typically within public right of way of the local agency or the State. When within the State highway right of way, the need for sidewalks becomes a shared interest, since the zoning, planned development, and growth are under the local agency’s purview. The State may assume financial responsibility for the construction of sidewalks and walkways under the conditions described below. See the Project Development Procedures Manual for further discussion of the State's responsibility in providing pedestrian facilities.
(1) Replacement in Kind. Where existing sidewalks are to be disturbed by highway construction, the replacement applies only to the frontages involved and no other sidewalk construction is authorized except:
	(a) As part of a right of way agreement.
	(b) Where the safety or capacity of the highway will be improved.
(2) Conventional Highways. The roadway cross section usually provides areas for pedestrians. If the safety or capacity of the highway will be improved, the State may contribute towards the cost of building a pedestrian facility with a local agency project or fund it entirely with a State highway project. The city, county, or property owner whose adjacent development generated the pedestrian traffic may build sidewalks on State right of way under a permit in accordance with the route concept report.
(3) Freeway and other Controlled Access Facilities. Sidewalks should be built across the freeway right of way on overcrossings and through undercrossings where necessary to connect with existing or planned sidewalks. Construction of planned sidewalks should be imminent. Within the foregoing criteria, sidewalks can be part of the original project or added later when the surrounding area develops.
(4) Overcrossing and Undercrossing Approaches. Where sidewalks are planned on overcrossing structures or under a structure, an area should be provided to accommodate future sidewalks.
(5) School Pedestrian Walkways. School pedestrian walkways may be identified along a route used by school pedestrians that is not limited to crossing locations, but includes where physical conditions require students to walk in or along rural or suburban roadways.
(6) Frontage Roads. Sidewalks may be built along frontage roads connecting local streets that would otherwise dead end at the freeways. Such sidewalks can be new or replacements of existing facilities. Sidewalks may not be needed on the freeway side of frontage roads except where connections must be made to pedestrian separations or other connections where appropriate.
(7) Separated Cross Streets. Sidewalks may be built on separated cross streets where reconstruction of the cross street is made necessary by the freeway project and where the criteria of paragraph (3) above apply.
(8) Transit Stops. Sidewalks should be built to connect transit stops to local streets.
(9) Vehicular Tunnels. Sidewalks and pedestrian facilities may be built as part of vehicular tunnels which do not require ventilation as part of the tunnel structure. Contact the Division of Engineering Services - Structure Design (DES-SD), regarding allowable conditions.
(10) Maintenance. The State is responsible for maintaining and replacing damaged sidewalks within the right of way except:
	(a) Where the sidewalk was placed by a private party under encroachment permit that requires the permittee to maintain the sidewalk, but only if the original permittee still owns the abutting property.
	(b) Where the city or county has placed nonstandard sidewalks with colored or textured surfaces, or meandering alignment. See Maintenance Manual for additional discussion on State's maintenance responsibilities regarding sidewalks.

### 105.3 Pedestrian Grade Separations
(1) Pedestrian grade separation takes the form of pedestrian overcrossings or undercrossings. These grade separations are suitable for crossing freeways, rivers, railroads, canyons and other obstacles for which no other crossing opportunities exist. See Index 208.6 for design guidance for pedestrian and bicycle overcrossings and undercrossings. The need for a pedestrian grade separation is based on a study of the present and future needs of a particular area or community. Each situation should be investigated and considered on its own merits. The study should cover pedestrian generating sources in the area, pedestrian crossing volumes, type of highway to be crossed, location of adjacent crossing facilities, circuity, zoning, land use, sociological and cultural factors, and the predominant age of persons expected to utilize the facility. Pedestrian patterns should be maintained across freeway routes where these patterns have been previously established. Where vehicular crossings are inadequate for pedestrians, separate structures should be provided. In general, if a circuitous route is involved, a pedestrian separation may be justified even though the number of pedestrians is small. State participation in the financing of pedestrian separations at ramp terminals is not normally justified because of the crash history at these locations. Exceptions to this general policy should be considered only in special circumstances where no less expensive alternative is feasible. Where a pedestrian grade separation is justified, an overcrossing is preferred. Undercrossings tend to provide less visibility which provides more opportunities for vandalism and criminal activity. Consideration may be given to an undercrossing when specifically requested in writing by a local agency. Unobstructed visibility should be provided through the structure and approaches. See Index 105.4 for discussion of provisions for persons with disabilities.
(2) Financing.
	(a) Freeways--Where the pedestrian grade separation is justified prior to award of the freeway contract, the State should pay the full cost of the pedestrian facility. In some cases, construction of the separation may be deferred; however, where the need has been established to the satisfaction of the Department prior to award of the freeway contract, the State should pay the entire cost of the separation. Local jurisdictions have control (by zoning and planning) of development that influences pedestrian traffic patterns. Therefore, where a pedestrian grade separation is justified after the award of a freeway contract, the State's share of the total construction cost of the separation should not exceed 50 percent. The State must enter into a cooperative agreement with the local jurisdiction on this basis.
	(b) Conventional Highways--Grade separations are not normally provided for either cars or pedestrians on conventional highways. However, in those rare cases where pedestrian use is extensive, where it has been determined that placement and configuration of the grade separation will result in the majority of pedestrians using it, and where the local agency has requested in writing that a pedestrian separation be constructed, an overcrossing may be considered. The State's share of the total construction cost of the pedestrian facility should not exceed 50 percent. The State must enter into a cooperative agreement with the local jurisdiction on this basis.
