### Caltrans ROW Process
Caltrans is reponsible for identifying the required ROW for a project.
### Methods of acquisitions
1. Fee Acquisition (we own it)
	Full takes or Partial takes
		For partial takes, the remaining property must still be of some value to the owner.
		Partial takes are rounded to full takes when the remaining property sucks.
2. Permanent Easement acquisition (we buy a right on someone else's land)
	To prevent the owner from doing something with their land.
	Footing Easement: access to structural foundations that extend beyond ROW.
	Slope Easement: prevent owner from modifying the slope.
	Drainage Easement: limited access to maintain drainage outside ROW.
	Utility Easement: allow others to place utilities in CT ROW.
3. Temporary Construction Easement (TCE) (we rent land temporarily)
	Need to identity start and end dates. Duration.
		1. Duration of the TCE
		2. Duration of the project
	Needed where formwork or equipment must occupy private property temporarily.
	Not required for Caltrans to access City & County land for improvements.

### Developing ROW Needs
3 Months: Project engineer prepares a R/W Requirement Map to submit to R/W Engineer.
Tangents are preferred over squiggles.
Proposed R/W == Fee
Exist R/W == Owned Right of Way
TCE == TCE

3 Months: R/W Engineer prepares Appraisal Maps and submits to R/W Appraisal Team
	The Appraisal Map is the legal document that becomes public record.

After Appraising:
Case 1: (12 months)
	appraisal completed and condemnation NOT required. Everyone agrees to sell their property.
Case 2: (12-24 months)
	appraisal completed and condemnation required. Caltrans has to take people to court.

### Factors to consider:
Businesses and property that provide income
	they are entited to compensation for potential losses of income 
	Included:
		relocation costs
		safe and sanitary housing 
		loss of business income & goodwill
Highway Use Permit
	state routes can build on federal land if then are give this permit
Prior Rights
	if the highway came first, then the highway rights take over the property owner.